Cambridge (CIE) IGCSE
Physics
Physical Quantities & Measurement
Techniques
Contents
Measurement
Scalars & Vectors
Calculating with VectorsYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 1

Measurement
Measuring length & volume
When making measurements in physics, different instruments are used for different
measurements
Measuring length
Rulers can be used to measure small distances of a few centimetres (cm).
They are able to measure to the nearest millimetre (mm)
A ruler can measure lengths in cm or mm
A tape measure is used to measure lengths of tens of centimetres
A trundle wheel is used to measure lengths of tens of metres
Trundle wheels can be used to measure larger distancesYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 2

Measuring volume
Measuring cylinder are used to measure the volume of liquids
By measuring the change in volume, a measuring cylinder can also be used to
determine the volume of an irregular shape
Measuring cylinders can be used to determine the volume of a liquid or an irregular shaped
solid
Worked Example
The diagram shows four identical ball-bearings placed between two blocks on a steel
ruler. Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 3

Measuring time
In physics, stop-clocks and stopwatches are usually used to measure time intervals
An important factor when measuring time intervals is human reaction time
The standard human reaction time for an alert person is 0.25 s 
Calculate the diameter of one ball-bearing.
Answer:
Step 1: Measure the length of all four ball-bearings
The blocks mark the edges of the first and last ball bearings
The blocks make it easier to measure the length of all four ball-bearings
total length =12 −4
total length =8cm
Step 2: Find the diameter by dividing the total length by the number of ball-
bearings
diameter =total length
number ofballbearings
diameter =8
4
diameter =2cm
Examiner Tips and Tricks
Two measurements can be considered equal within the limits of experimental
accuracy if their values are within 10% of each otherYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 4

This can have a significant impact upon measurements when the measurements
involved are very short 
Worked Example
A stopwatch is used to measure the time taken for a runner to complete a lap of a 400
m track. 
The images below give the readings on the stopwatch at the start and the end of the
lap.
Calculate how long it took the runner to complete the lap. Give your answer in
seconds. 
Answer:
Step 1: Identify the start time for the lap
The stopwatch was already at 0:55:10 when the runner started the lap
Start time =  55.10 seconds (s)
Step 2: Identify the finish time for the lap
The stopwatch reads 1:45:10 at the end of the lap
Finish time = 1 minute and 45.10 s
Step 3: Convert the finish time into seconds
1minute =60seconds
finish time =60s +45 .10s
finish time =105 .10s
Step 4: Calculate the total time taken to complete the lap
total time =finish time −start time
total time =105 .10s −55 .10sYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 5

Multiple readings
In physics, multiple readings of measurements are often taken to reduce the impact of
measurement errors
Taking multiple measurements in physics
The measurement of the thickness of a single sheet of paper is so small that it would be
very difficult to get an accurate answer
However, measuring the thickness of 100 sheets of paper can be done much more
accurately
Dividing the answer by 100 then gives an accurate figure for the average thickness
of one sheet
Measuring the time period of a simple pendulum would incur a human reaction time error
at the start of the measurement and at the end of the measurement
If the measurement is small, the uncertainty in the measurement is hugetotal time =50s
Examiner Tips and Tricks
You will sometimes find that information is given in the question that is not actually
needed in the calculation. 
In this worked example, you were told that the track the runner is running on is 400 m.
This had nothing to do with the calculation the question asked you to perform. 
This is a common method for making a question seem more difficult. Don't let it catch
you out.Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 6

Therefore, multiple readings can be taken to reduce the uncertainty of the
measurement
The time taken for 10 swings of the pendulum can be measured
Dividing the answer by 10 gives a more accurate figure for the average time taken
for one swing
A fiducial marker can be used when measuring oscillations
A fiducial marker is a visual reference point such as a line or a dot
The marker is added to the point at which the measurement is taken, such as the
equilibrium position of an oscillating pendulum
This makes it easier to see when the pendulum passes this point, reducing the error
in starting and stopping the timerYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 7

Scalars & Vectors
Scalar & vector quantities
Extended tier only
All quantities can be one of two types:
A scalar
A vector
Scalars
Scalar quantities have only a magnitude
Mass is an example of a scalar quantity because it has magnitude without direction
Energy and volume are also examples of scalar quantities
Vectors
Vector quantities have both magnitude and direction
Weight is an example of a vector quantity because it is a force and therefore has
both magnitude and direction
Acceleration and momentum are also examples of vector quantities
Distance and displacement
Distance is a measure of how far an object has travelled, regardless of direction
Distance is the total length of the path taken
Distance, therefore, has a magnitude but no direction
So, distance is a scalar quantity
Displacement is a measure of how far it is between two points in space, including the
direction
Displacement is the length and direction of a straight line drawn from the starting
point to the finishing point
Displacement, therefore, has a magnitude and a direction
So, displacement is a vector quantity
What is the difference between distance and displacement?Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 8

Displacement is a vector quantity, while distance is a scalar quantity
When a student travels to school, there will probably be a difference between the
distance they travel and their displacement
The overall distance they travel includes the total lengths of all the roads, including
any twists and turns
The overall displacement of the student would be a straight line between their
home and school, regardless of any obstacles, such as buildings, lakes or
motorways, along the way
Speed and velocity
Speed is a measure of the distance travelled by an object per unit time, regardless of
the direction
The speed of an object describes how fast it is moving, but not the direction it is
travelling in
Speed, therefore, has magnitude but no direction
So, speed is a scalar quantity
Velocity is a measure of the displacement of an object per unit time, including the
direction
The velocity of an object describes how fast it is moving and which direction it is
travelling in
An object can have a constant speed but a changing velocity if the object is
changing direction
Velocity, therefore, has magnitude and directionYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 9

So, velocity is a vector quantity
Examples of scalars & vectors
Extended tier only
The table below lists some common examples of scalar and vector quantities
Corresponding scalars and their vector counterparts are aligned in the table where
applicable
Table of scalars and vectors
Scalar Vector
distance displacement
speed velocity
mass weight
force
acceleration
momentum
electric field strength
energy
volume
density
temperature
power
Worked Example
An instructor is in charge of training junior astronauts. For one of their sessions, they
would like to explain the difference between mass and weight.Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 10

Suggest how the instructor should explain the difference between mass and weight,
using definitions of scalars and vectors in your answer.
Answer:
Step 1: Recall the definitions of a scalar and vector quantity
Scalars are quantities that have only a magnitude
Vectors are quantities that have both magnitude and direction
Step 2: Identify which quantity has magnitude only
Mass is a quantity with magnitude only
So mass is a scalar quantity
The instructor might explain to their junior astronauts that their mass will not
change as their location in the Universe changes
Step 3: Identify which quantity has magnitude and direction
Weight is a quantity with magnitude and direction (it is a force)
So weight is a vector quantity
The instructor might explain that their weight, the force on them due to
gravitational field strength, will vary depending on their location. For example, the
force of weight acting on them would be less on the Moon than it is on Earth
Examiner Tips and Tricks
Make sure you are comfortable with the differences between similar scalars and
vectors.
The most commonly confused pairings tend to be:
distance and displacement
speed and velocity
weight and massYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 11

Calculating with Vectors
Calculations with vectors
Extended tier only
Vectors can be drawn using vector diagrams
Vector diagrams
Vectors are represented by an arrow
The length of the arrow represents the magnitude
The direction of the arrow indicates the direction 
the scale of the arrows should be proportional to the relative magnitudes of the
forces
an arrow for a 4 N force should be twice as long as an arrow for a 2 N force
Vector diagram of two forces acting on an object
The length of the arrows are proportional to the magnitude of the forces, and show the
direction that forces act in
Calculating vectors graphically
Vector diagrams can be used to combine vectors
Vectors at right angles to one another can be combined into one resultant vector
The resultant vector will have the combined effect of the two original vectors
For example, a resultant force vector will have the combined effect of two
component forces
Component vectors are sometimes drawn with a dotted line and a subscript indicating
horizontal or vertical
A force F, for example, may have two components:Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 12

FV is the vertical component of the force F
FH is the horizontal component of force F
To calculate vectors graphically means carefully producing a scale drawing with all
lengths and angles correct
This should be done using a sharp pencil, ruler and protractor
Follow these steps to carry out calculations with vectors on graphs
1. Choose a scale which fits the page
For example, use 1 cm = 10 m or 1 cm = 1 N, so that the diagram is around 10 cm high
2. Draw the vectors at right angles to one another
3. Complete the rectangle
4. Draw the resultant vector diagonally from the origin
5. Carefully measure the length of the resultant vector
6. Use the scale factor to calculate the magnitude
7. Use the protractor to measure the angle
Vectors can be measured or calculated graphically using scaled vector diagrams
Combining vectors by calculation
In this method, a vector diagram is still essential but it does not need to be exactly to
scale
The vector diagram can take the form of a sketch, as long as the resultant side,
component sides are clearly labelledYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 13

Using a vector diagram to resolve two force vectors F and F into a resultant force vector
F
When the magnitude of only one vector is known, and the angle is known, then
trigonometry can be used to find the magnitude of the missing vector
The mnemonic 'soh-cah-toa' can used to remember the trigonometric functions
Trigonometry can be used when the magnitude of one vector and the angle is known1 2
RYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 14

When the magnitudes of two of the vectors are known, then Pythagoras' theorem can
be used to find the magnitude of the missing vector
Pythagoras's theorem can be used when the magnitudes of two of the three vectors are
known
Worked Example
A force acts on an object with 60 N to the right. A second force of 100 N acts on the
same object in the upward direction.
Calculate the resultant force acting on the object.
Answer:
Step 1: Draw a vector diagramYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 15

Step 2: Calculate the magnitude of the resultant force using Pythagoras' theorem
F = 602+1002
F = 13600
F =117N
Step 3: Calculate the direction of the resultant vector using trigonometry
Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 16

tanθ =opposite
adjacent
tanθ =100
60
θ=tan−1⎛⎜⎜
⎝⎞⎟⎟
⎠100
60=59°
Step 4: State the final answer, complete with magnitude and direction
F=117Nat59°from thehorizontal
Examiner Tips and Tricks
If the question specifically asks you to use the calculation or graphical method, you
must solve the problem as asked. However, if the choice is left up to you then any
correct method will lead to the correct answer.
The graphical method sometimes feels easier than calculating, but once you are
confident with trigonometry and Pythagoras you will find calculating quicker and
more accurate.Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 17

