Cambridge (CIE) IGCSE
Physics
Electrical Quantities
Contents
Electric Charge
Demonstrating Electric Charges
Electric Fields
Investigating Conductors & Insulators
Current
Direct & Alternating Current
Electromotive Force
Potential Difference
Resistance
Resistance of a Wire
Electrical Energy
Electrical PowerYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 1

Electric Charge
Positive & negative charges
There are two types of electric charge: positive and negative
Inside an atom, there are
negatively charged electrons
positively charged protons
neutral (no charge) neutrons
Atoms contain equal numbers of protons and electrons as they have equal and opposite
charges
These charges cancel out so the overall charge of an atom is zero
Structure of an atom
The number of negative electrons in an atom balances the number of positive protons
Attraction and repulsion
When two charges are close together, they exert a force on each other, this could be:
Attractive (the objects get closer together)
Repulsive (the objects move further apart)
Electric forces between chargesYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 2

Opposite charges attract, like charges repel
Whether two objects attract or repel depends on their charge
If the charges are the opposite, they will attract
If the charges are the same, they will repel
Attraction or repulsion summary table
Charge of object 1 Charge of object 2 Attract or repel?
positive positive repel
positive negative attract
negative positive attract
negative negative repel
The table shows that:
Positive charges repel other positive charges and attract negative charges
Negative charges repel other negative charges and attract positive charges
Extended tier only
Electric charge is measured in units called coulombs (C)
Examiner Tips and Tricks
Remember the saying “opposites attract” when answering questions about forces
between charged particles.
While electrostatic forces share many similarities with magnetic forces, they are
different phenomena – do not confuse the two!Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 3

Demonstrating Electric Charges
Charging by friction
When certain insulating solids are rubbed against each other, they can become
electrically charged
This is called charging by friction
The charges remain on the insulators and cannot immediately flow away
One gains a net positive charge and the other gains a net negative charge
An example of this is a plastic or polythene rod being charged by rubbing it with a cloth
Both the rod and cloth are insulating materials
Charging solids by friction
A polyethene rod may be given a charge by rubbing it with a cloth
When an uncharged cloth is rubbed against an uncharged polythene rod
Electrons are transferred away from the cloth to the rod
The cloth has lost electrons so it becomes positively charged
The polythene rod has gained electrons so it becomes negatively charged
These oppositely charged objects are also attracted to each other
When an uncharged cloth is rubbed against an uncharged acetate plastic rod, however
Electrons are transferred away from the acetate rod to the cloth
The cloth has gained electrons so it becomes negatively chargedYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 4

The rod has lost electrons so it becomes positively charged
Electrons are transferred away from the acetate rod to the cloth but transferred away
from the cloth to the polythene rod
Demonstrating electrostatic charges
Experiment 1: investigating electrostatic charging by
friction
The aim of this experiment is to investigate how insulating materials can be charged by
friction
Variables
Independent variable = Rods of different material
Dependent variable = Charge on the rod
Control variables:Examiner Tips and Tricks
At this level, if you are asked to explain how charge is gained or lost, you must
reference electrons. If an object gains electrons, it gains negative charge and if it
loses electrons it loses negative charge (and hence, gains positive charge)
Remember when charging by friction, it is only the electrons that can move, not any
'positive' charge, therefore if an insulator gains a negative charge, the other insulator
must have gained a positive chargeYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 5

Time spent rubbing the rod
Using the same type of cloth
Using the same length of rod
Equipment
Equipment list
Equipment Purpose
Polythene rod to charge and hang from a cradle to test against
each material
Rods of different materials (acrylic,
acetate, glass, wood)to observe the effects of these on the polythene
rod
Cloths (one per material) to rub the materials to charge them
Cradle to suspend rods from, allowing them to move
freely when subjected to a force
Nylon string to hang the rods
Wooden stand to suspend the string and cradle from
Method
Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 6

Apparatus for investigating charging by friction
1. Take a polythene rod, hold it at its centre and rub both ends with a cloth
2. Suspend the rod, without touching the ends, from a stand using a cradle and nylon string
3. Take a second polythene rod and rub one end with a different cloth
4. Bring the second polythene rod close to the suspended rod
5. Record any observations of the suspended rod's motion, i.e. whether it is attracted or
repelled by the second rod
6. Repeat using an acetate rod and rods of different materials
Example results table
charged material 1 charged material 2 attracted or repelled
polythene polythene
polythene acetate
Analysis of results
When two insulating materials are rubbed together, negative charge (electrons) will
transfer from one insulator to the other
A polythene rod gains a negative charge when rubbed with a cloth
This is because electrons are transferred to the polythene from the cloth
An acetate rod gains a positive charge when rubbed with a cloth
This is because electrons are removed from the acetate by the cloth
Transfer of electrons between charged insulatorsYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 7

Electrons are transferred to the polythene rod giving it a negative charge, and they move
from the acetate rod giving it a positive charge
If the material is repelled by the polythene rod, then the materials have the same charge
For example, the polythene rod would be repelled by a second polythene rod, as
they have the same charge
If the material is attracted to the polythene rod, then they have opposite charges
For example, the polythene rod would be attracted to an acetate rod, as they have
opposite charges
Evaluating the experiment
Reduce the effects of environmental factors (e.g. close windows to reduce drafts) to
ensure the motion of the polythene rod is due to electric forces only
Make sure not to touch the ends of the rods once they have been charged (if the ends
are touched, the rods will discharge and the forces will no longer be present)
Produce greater deflections by rubbing the rods for a longer period to transfer more
charge (ensuring that the time spent rubbing each rod is the same)
Experiment 2: detecting charge using a gold-leaf
electroscope
The aim of this experiment is to detect charge using a gold leaf electroscope
Variables
Independent variable = Rods of different material
Dependent variable = Charge on the rodYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 8

Equipment
Equipment list
Equipment Purpose
Gold-leaf electroscope to detect charge
Polythene and acetate rods
(or strips)to observe the effects of these on the gold-leaf
electroscope when charged
Cloths (one per material) to charge the rods (or strips) by rubbing them
Method
The gold-leaf electroscope is a device consisting of a metal plate, a metal stem and a thin
gold leaf. The stem and leaf are housed in an airtight container to prevent draughts.
1. Before beginning the experiment, ensure the plate of the electroscope is uncharged by
touching it with your finger. The leaf should hang straight down next to the stem
2. Charge a polythene rod by rubbing it with a cloth
3. Bring the charged rod towards the plate of the electroscope and record any
observationsYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 9

4. Bring the charged rod away from the plate of the electroscope and record any
observations
5. Touch the charged rod to the plate of the electroscope and record any observations
6. Repeat using an acetate rod
Example results table
charged
materialaction gold leaf rises or
fallsmovement of
electrons
polythene moved towards plate
polythene moved away from
plate
polythene touched plate
acetate moved towards plate
acetate moved away from
plate
acetate touched plate
Analysis of results
When a charged object is brought near the plate of the electroscope, the leaf rises
The negatively charged polythene rod repels electrons away from the surface of the
plate down the stem and leaf, giving them a negative charge, hence, they repel
The positively charged acetate rod attracts electrons to the surface of the metal
plate from the stem and leaf, giving them a positive charge, hence, they repel
When the charged object is moved away from the plate, the leaf falls
Electrons in the electroscope are no longer repelled or attracted by the rod so they
redistribute themselves
The stem and leaf become electrically neutral
When a charged object touches the plate of the electroscope, the leaf stays risen
The charge from the rod is transferred to the metal plate and travels down the stem
and leaf of the electroscope
The stem and leaf therefore carry the same charge and repel each other
The electroscope has been chargedYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 10

When a finger touches the plate, the leaf falls
The charge from the electroscope is transferred to the person and travels to the
earth
The stem and leaf become electrically neutral
The electroscope has been discharged
Evaluating the experiment
Make sure not to touch the ends of the rods once they have been charged (if the ends
are touched, the rods will discharge)
When the electroscope is charged by contact with a rod, it should stay risen. If it doesn't,
repeat the process but ensure to press harder and draw the rod along the edge of the
plate
Examiner Tips and Tricks
Experimental demonstrations, such as the one above, are different from experiments
in which you have to take measurements. In the case of this demonstration your
results are your observations.
When describing a demonstration you should state a conclusion – in other words,
explain what you expect to happen and what it means.Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 11

Electric Fields
Electric fields
Extended tier only
An electric field is defined as:
A region of space in which an electric charge experiences a force
The direction of an electric field at a point is defined as:
The direction of the force on a positive charge at that point
Charged objects create electric fields around themselves
This is similar to how magnets create magnetic fields
An electric field is a vector quantity as it has both magnitude (strength) and direction
Electric field patterns
Extended tier only
Electric field lines are
used to represent the direction and magnitude of an electric field
always directed from the positive charge to the negative charge
Electric field around a point charge
Around a point charge, the electric field lines are directly radially inwards or outwards:
If the charge is positive (+), the field lines are radially outwards
If the charge is negative (-), the field lines are radially inwards
Electric field lines around positive and negative point charges
Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 12

Electric field lines around a point charge are directed away from a positive charge and
towards a negative charge
Electric field around a charged conducting sphere
The field lines around a charged conducting sphere are similar to that of a point charge
This is because the charges on the surface of the sphere will be evenly distributed
The charges are the same, so they repel
The surface is conducting, allowing them to move
Field lines are always perpendicular (at right angles)to the surface of a conducting
sphere
Electric field lines around a positively charged sphere
The electric field pattern around a conducting can be demonstrated using a Van der
Graaff generator
Electric field between two parallel plates
The electric field between two parallel plates is a uniform electric field
The field lines are:
directed from the positive to the negative plate
parallel
straight linesYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 13

Electric field lines between two oppositely charged parallel
plates
Electric field lines between two parallel plates are directed from the positive to the
negative plate. A uniform electric field has equally spaced field linesYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 14

Investigating Conductors & Insulators
Electrical conductors & insulators
Conductors
A conductor is a material that allows charge (usually electrons) to flow through it easily
Some examples of conductors are:
silver
copper
aluminium
steel
The best conductors tend to be metals
On the atomic scale, metallic conductors are made up of positively charged metal ions
with their outermost electrons delocalised
This means the electrons are free to move
Metals conduct electricity very well because:
Current is the rate of flow of electrons
So, the more easily electrons are able to flow, the better the conductor
Metallic lattice structure
The lattice structure of a conductor with positive metal ions and delocalised electrons
InsulatorsYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 15

An insulator is a material that has no free charges and,hence does not allow the flow of
charge through it very easily
Some examples of insulators are:
rubber
plastic
glass
wood
Some non-metals, such as wood, allow some charge to pass through them
Although they are not very good at conducting, they do conduct a little in the form of
static electricity
For example, two insulators can build up charge on their surfaces and if they touch
this would allow that charge to be conducted away
Conductors and insulators
Different materials have different properties of conductivity
Investigating electrical conductors &
insulators
Aim of the experiment
The aim of this experiment is to distinguish between good and bad conductors using a
gold leaf electroscope
Variables
Independent variable = Different materials
Dependent variable = Electrical conductivity of materials
Equipment
Equipment list
Equipment PurposeYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 16

Gold-leaf electroscope to distinguish between electrical conductors
and insulators
Polythene rod to charge the electroscope by contact
Cloth to charge the rod by friction
Different conducting and insulating
materials (metal, plastic, glass, wood)to observe the effects of these on the gold-
leaf electroscope when uncharged
Method
1. Before beginning the experiment, ensure the plate of the electroscope is uncharged by
touching it with your finger. The leaf should hang straight down next to the stem
2. Charge a polythene rod by rubbing it with a cloth
3. Touch the charged rod to the plate of the electroscope. The leaf should stay risen if the
electroscope has been successfully charged
4. Touch the plate of the charged electroscope with the first object to be tested and
record any observations
5. Repeat for different materials
Example results table
material gold leaf falls quickly or slowly good or bad conductor
metal
plastic
glass
graphite
wood
fabric
rubberYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 17

Analysis of results
Good conductors, such as metals, allow charge to flow through them easily
Therefore, a good conductor will cause the leaf to fall quickly as it allows charge to
flow to or from the plate
The faster the leaf falls, the better the conductor
Poor conductors, such as glass, do not allow charge to flow as easily
Therefore, a poor conductor will cause the leaf to fall slowly as the charge is unable
to flow as well
If the leaf does not move at all, the material is a good insulator
The expected results are shown in the table below:
Table of conductors and insulators
good conductors poor conductors (insulators)
metal plastic
graphite glass
wood
rubber
fabric
Evaluating the experiment
An electrometer (electronic instrument capable of measuring electric charge) could be
used instead of an electroscope to allow for numerical comparisons between good and
poor conductorsYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 18

Current
Current
Electric current is defined as
The rate of flow of electric charge
Current flows
when a circuit is formed e.g. when a wire connects the two oppositely charged
terminals of a cell
from the positive terminal to the negative terminal of a cell
Charge flows from the positive terminal to the negative terminal
Measuring current
Current can be measured using an ammeter
Ammeters must be connected in series with the component being measuredYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 19

An ammeter can be used to measure the current around a circuit
Ammeters can be
digital (with an electronic read out)
analogue (with a needle and scale)
Analogue ammeters
Typical ranges are 0.1−1.0 A and 1.0−5.0 A for analogue ammeters
Always double check exactly where the marker is before an experiment, if not at
zero, you will need to subtract this from all your measurements. They should be
checked for zero errors before using
They are also subject to parallax error
Always read the meter from a position directly perpendicular to the scaleYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 20

Digital ammeters
Digital ammeters can measure very small currents, in mA or µA
Digital displays show the measured values as digits and are more accurate than
analogue displays
They’re easy to use because they give a specific value and are capable of displaying
more precise values
However digital displays may 'flicker' back and forth between values and a
judgement must be made as to which to write down
Digital ammeters should be checked for zero error
Make sure the reading is zero before starting an experiment, or subtract the “zero”
value from the end results
Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 21

Electrical conduction in metals
The wires in an electric circuit are made of metal because it is a good conductor of
electric current
In the wires, the current is a flow of negativelychargedelectrons
In metal wires, the current is a flow of negatively charged electrons. When a potential
difference is applied, electrons flow through the lattice of metal ions
Calculating current
Extended tier only
Electric current can be defined more precisely as:
The charge passing a point in a circuit per unit time
Current is measured in units of amperes or amps (A)
1 amp is equivalent to a charge of 1 coulomb flowing in 1 second, or 1 A = 1 C/s
This means the size of an electric current is the amount of charge passing through a
component each second
Current, charge and time are related by the equation:
I =Q
t
Where:
Q = charge, measured in coulombs (C)Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 22

I = current, measured in amps (A)
t = time, measured in seconds (s)
The current, charge and time equation can be rearranged with the help of the following
formula triangle:
Current charge time formula triangle
Formula triangle for the charge, current and time equation
Worked Example
When will 8 A of current pass through an electrical circuit?
A.     When 8 J of energy is used by 1 C of charge
B.     When a charge of 4 C passes in 0.5 s
C.     When a charge of 8 C passes in 0.1 s
D.     When a charge of 1 C passes in 8 s
ANSWER:  B
The equation relating current, charge and time is:
Q =I ×t
Rearrange to make current I the subject of the equation:
I =Q
t
Consider option B, where Q = 4 C and t = 0.5 s:Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 23

Conventional current
Extended tier only
Current is the flow of positive charge i.e. from the positive terminal to the negative
terminal of a cell
This is known as conventional current
This is in the opposite direction to electron flow
Electrons are negatively charged, so they flow from the negative terminal to the
positive terminal of a cell
Conventional current and electron flowI =4
0 .5=8A
Therefore, the correct answer is B
A is incorrect as this is the definition of a voltage of 8 V between two points and does
not describe current
C is incorrect as  I =8
0 .1=80A
D is incorrect as  I =1
8=0 .125A
Examiner Tips and Tricks
Electric currents in everyday circuits tend to be quite small, so it's common for
examiners to throw in a unitprefix like 'm' next to quantities of current, e.g. 10 mA (10
milliamperes). Make sure you can convert these into standard units, e.g. 10 mA = 10 ×
10 A.
Make sure to only use the triangle to help you rearrange the equation that links
charge, current and time. Don't draw it if you are asked to write out the equation in full,
such as Q = I × t, as you may lose marks for doing so.
Check out this revision note on speed, distance and time if you need a reminder on
how to use formula triangles.-3 Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 24

By definition, conventional current always goes from positive to negative. This is in the
opposite direction to the flow of electronsYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 25

Direct & Alternating Current
Direct & alternating current
There are two types of current
direct current (d.c.)
alternating current (a.c.)
Direct current
A direct current (d.c.) is defined as
A steady current, constantly flowing in the same direction in a circuit, from positive to
negative
The potential difference across a cell in a d.c. circuit travels in one direction only
The current travels from the positive terminal to the negative terminal
A d.c. power supply has a fixed positive terminal and a fixed negative terminal
Electric cells, or batteries, produce direct current (d.c.)
Alternating current
An alternating current (a.c.) is defined as
A current that continuously changes its direction, going back and forth around a circuit
An alternating current power supply has two identical terminals that change from
positive to negative and back again
The alternating current always travels from the positive terminal to the negative
terminal
Therefore, the current changes direction as the polarity of the terminals changes
The frequency of an alternating current is the number of times the current changes
direction back and forth each second
In the UK, mains electricity is an alternating current with a frequency of 50 Hz and a
potential difference of around 230 V
Graphs of direct current and alternating currentYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 26

Two graphs showing the variation of current with time for alternating current and direct
current
Comparing direct and alternating current
The following table summarises the differences between d.c. and a.c.
Direct current vs. alternating current table
Direct current (d.c.) Alternating current (a.c.)
continuous and in one direction constantly changing direction
produced by cells and batteries produced by electrical generators i.e. mains
electricity
involves a positive and negative
terminalinvolves two identical terminals
Examiner Tips and Tricks
If asked to explain the difference between alternating and direct current, sketch the
graphs shown above: a well-sketched (and labelled) graph can earn you full marks. Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 27

Electromotive Force
Electromotive force
Electromotive force (e.m.f.) is the name given to the potential difference of the power
source in a circuit
It is defined as
The electrical work done by a source in moving a unit charge around a complete circuit
Electromotive force (e.m.f.) is measured in volts (V)
The e.m.f. is the voltage supplied by a power supply: 12 V in the above case
Calculating electromotive force
Extended tier only
The definition of e.m.f. can also be expressed using the equation:
E =W
Q
Where
E = electromotive force (e.m.f.), measured in volts (V)
W = energy transferred to the charges from the power source, measured in joules (J)
Q = charge moved, measured in coulombs (C)Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 28

This equation should be compared to the definition of potential difference as the two
are closely related
Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 29

Potential Difference
Potential difference
Potential difference is defined as:
The work done by a unit charge passing through a component
Potential difference is measured in units of volts (V)
The potential difference between two points in a circuit is related to the amount of
energy transferred between those points
The potential difference is the difference in the electrical potential across each
component: 5 volts for the bulb (on the left) and 7 volts for the resistor (on the right)
As electrons flow through a cell, they gain energy
For example, in a 12 V cell, every coulomb of charge passing through gains 12 J of
energy
As electrons flow through a circuit, they lose energy
For example, after leaving the 12 V cell, each coulomb of charge will transfer 12 J of
energy to the wires and components in the circuit
Measuring potential difference
Potential difference can be measured using a voltmeter
Voltmeters must be set up in parallel with the component being measuredYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 30

This is because potential difference is the difference in electrical potential between
two points
Therefore, a voltmeter has to be connected to two points in the circuit 
Potential difference can be measured by connecting a voltmeter in parallel between two
points in a circuit
Voltmeters can be
digital (with an electronic read out)
analogue (with a needle and scale)
Analogue voltmeters
Analogue voltmeters are subject to parallax error
Always read the meter from a position directly perpendicular to the scale
Typical ranges are 0.1−1.0 V and 0−5.0 V for analogue voltmeters although they can vary
Always double-check exactly where the marker is before an experiment, if not at
zero, you will need to subtract this from all your measurements
They should be checked for zero errors before using
Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 31

Voltmeters can be either analogue (with a scale and needle) or digital (with electronic
read-out)
Digital voltmeters
Digital voltmeterscan measure very small potential differences, in mV or µV
Digital displays show the measured values as digits and are more accurate than
analogue displays
They’re easy to use because they give a specific value and are capable of displaying
more precise values
However digital displays may 'flicker' back and forth between values and a
judgement must be made as to which to write down
Digital voltmeters should be checked for zero error
Make sure the reading is zero before starting an experiment, or subtract the “zero”
value from the end results
Calculating potential difference
Extended tier only
Potential difference, energy transferred and charge are related by the equation:
V =W
Q
Where:
V = potential difference, measured in volts (V)
W = energy transferred to the components, measured in joules (J)
Q = charge moved, measured in coulombs (C)Examiner Tips and Tricks
When you are building a circuit in class, always connect the voltmeter last. Make the
whole circuit first and check it works.
Only then pick up the voltmeter. Connect two leads to your voltmeter. Now connect
the leads so that they are one on each side of the component you are measuring. This
will save you a lot of time waiting for your teacher to troubleshoot your circuit!
You might sometimes see potential difference called voltage. Both mean the same
thing, but it is best to use the term potential difference. This can be particularly useful
when thinking about voltmeters as the potential difference describes a difference
between two points, therefore the voltmeter has to be connected between two
points in the circuit.Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 32

One volt is equivalent to the transfer of 1 joule of electrical energy by 1 coulomb of
charge, or 1 V = 1 J/C
This can be rearranged using the formula triangle below:
Energy charge and potential difference formula triangle
Formula triangle for the energy transferred, voltage and charge equation
Check out this revision note on speed, distance and time if you need a reminder on how
to use formula triangles
Worked Example
The normal operating voltage for a lamp is 6 V.
Calculate how much energy is transferred in the lamp when 4200 C of charge flows
through it.
Answer:
Step 1: List the known quantities
Voltage, V = 6 V
Charge, Q = 4200 C
Step 2: State the equation linking potential difference, energy and charge
The equation linking potential difference, energy and charge is:
V =W
Q
Step 3: Rearrange the equation and substitute the known valuesYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 33

W =V ×Q
W = 6 × 4200 = 25 200 J
Therefore, 25 200 J of energy is transferred in the lamp
Examiner Tips and Tricks
Don't be confused by the symbol for voltage (the symbolV) being the same as its unit
(the volt, V). Remember that one volt is equivalent to 'a joule per coulomb'.
Make sure to learn this equation and understand how it is similar (and different) to the
equation for e.m.f.Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 34

Resistance
Ohm's law
Resistance
Resistance is defined as:
The opposition to current
Resistance occurs because the free electrons flowing in the circuit (current) collide with
the metal ions in the wire
These collisions slow down the electrons, or, in other words, resist their flow
The higher the resistance of a circuit, the lower the current
This means that good conductors have a low resistance and insulators have a high
resistance
The resistance of a circuit can be increased by adding resistors (or variable resistors) to it
Every electrical component has a resistance, even wires
In exam questions, the resistance of the wires and batteries are assumed to be
negligible
The effect of resistance on the current in a circuit
When a circuit has a high resistance, a lower current will flow, and vice versa
Ohm's law
Current, I, potential difference, V, and resistance, R, all affect one anotherYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 35

Changing any one of these in a circuit, changes all of them
Current and resistance are inversely proportional
If the resistance is doubled, current will halve
This relationship is described by the following equation, known as Ohm's law
R =V
I
Where
R = resistance, measured in ohms ( Ω )
V = potential difference, measured in volts (V)
I = current, measured in amperes or amps (A)
Consequences of Ohm's law
Resistors are used in circuits to control either:
the current in branches of the circuit (through certain components)
the potential difference across certain components
This is due to the consequences of Ohm's Law
The current in an electrical conductor decreases as its resistance increases (for a
constant p.d.)
The p.d. across an electrical conductor increases as its resistance increases (for a
constant current)
Worked Example
A 12 Ω  resistor has a current of 0.3 A flowing through it. 
Determine the potential difference across the resistor.
Answer:
Step 1: List the known quantities
Resistance, R =12Ω
Current, I =0 .3A
Step 2: Write out the equation for Ohm's law and rearrange to make potential
difference the subject
R =V
IYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 36

Current-voltage graphs
Extended tier only
The relationship between current and potential difference of a component can be
shown on a current-voltage (I-V) graph
When the relationship between current and potential difference is linear:
the I-V graph is a straight line which passes through the origin
the resistance is constant
these are known as ohmic resistors
When the relationship between current and voltage is non-linear:
the I-V graph that is not a straight line
the resistance is not constant
these are known as non-ohmic resistors
Current-voltage (I-V) graph for a resistor and a filament lamp
Linear IV graphs are straight lines through the origin, indicating a constant resistance.
Non-linear IV graphs are curved, indicating a variable resistanceV =IR
Step 3: Substitute in the known values to calculate
V =0 .3 ×12
V =3 .6VYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 37

Components with linearI-V graphs (ohmic resistors) include:
fixed resistors (at constant temperature)
wires (at constant temperature)
Components with non-linear I-V graphs (non-ohmic resistors) include:
filament lamps
diodes
LDRs
thermistors
I-V graph for ohmic conductors
The relationship between current and voltage for a wire or fixed resistor is linear,
or directly proportional, which means
the IV graph is a straight line, so voltage and current increase (or decrease) by
the same amount
the slope of the graph is constant, so resistance is constant
I-V graph for a a wire of fixed resistor
The current is directly proportional to the potential difference (voltage) as the graph is a
straight line through the origin
I-V graph for a filament lamp
The relationship between current and voltage for a filament lamp is non-linear,
or not directly proportional, which meansYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 38

the IV graph is not a straight line, so voltage and current do not increase (or
decrease) by the same amount
the slope of the graph is not constant, so resistance changes
The IV graph for a filament lamp shows as voltage increases
the current increases at a proportionally slower rate
the resistance increases;the flatter the slope, the higher the resistance
I-V graph for a filament lamp
As current flows through a filament lamp, the lamp heats up; resistance increases with
temperature, causing the S-shaped curve
As current through a filament lamp increases, the resistance increases because:
the higher current causes the temperature of the filament to increase
the higher temperature causes the atoms in the metal lattice of the filament
to vibrate more
this causes an increase in resistance as it becomes more difficult
for freeelectrons (the current) to pass through
since resistance opposes the current, this causes it to increase at a slower rate
I-V graph for a diode
A diode allows current to flow in one direction only
This is called forward bias
In the reverse direction, the diode has very high resistance, and therefore no current
flows
This is called reverse biasYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 39

When the current is in the direction of the arrowhead symbol, this is forward bias
On the IV graph, this is shown by a sharp increase in voltage and current on the right
side of the graph
This shows the resistance is very low
When the diode is switched around, this is reverse bias
On the IV graph, this is shown by a zero reading of current or voltage on the left side
of the graph
This shows the resistance is very high
I-V graph for a diode
The current is zero at all potential differences in the negative quadrants because current
only flows one way through a diode; this gives the diode I-V graph its distinct shape
Examiner Tips and Tricks
In your IGCSE exam, you could be asked to recognise, sketch or explain the I-V graphs
for a wire / fixed resistor (ohmic conductors), a filament lamp and a diode.Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 40

Resistance of a Wire
Resistance of a wire
As electrons pass through a wire, they collide with the metal ions in the wire
These collisions transfer energy away from the kinetic store of the electrons, which
causes them to slow down
The energy from the electrons is transferred to the kinetic store of the vibrating metal
ions
This causes the vibration of the ions to increase (increased temperature)
As the vibration of the ions increases, the more the electrons collide with them
(increased resistance)
Electron collisions in a metal wire
Electrons collide with metal ions, which resist their flow
If the wire is longer, each electron will collide with more ions, and so there will be more
resistance:
The longer a wire, the greater its resistance
If the wire is thicker (greater diameter) there is more space for the electrons and so more
electrons can flow:
The thicker a wire, the smaller its resistanceYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 41

Proportionality relationships for
electrical conductors
Extended tier only
The relationship between resistance, length and cross-sectional area can be
represented mathematically
Resistance is directly proportional to length
Doubling the length will double the resistance and vice versa
R ∝L
Resistance is inversely proportional to cross-sectional area (width, or thickness) 
Doubling the cross-sectional area will halve the resistance
R ∝1
A
Effect of length and cross-sectional area on resistance
The mathematical relationship between length and width of the wire and the resistanceYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 42

Electrical Energy
Energy transfer in electrical circuits
As charge (electrons) flows around a circuit, energy is transferred from the power source
to the various components
As electrons pass through the power supply, energy is transferred to the electrons
As the electrons pass through each component, energy is transferred from the
electrons to the component 
The component will often dissipate some of that energy to the surroundings
Energy transfers in a circuit
Charge gains energy from the power supply, and transfers the energy to the components
Some domestic appliances transfer energy from the chemical store of cells and
batteries, such as mobile phones, laptops, and remote controls
Most larger household appliances transfer energy electrically from the mains supply
Lots of household appliances contain motors
Vacuum cleaners: to create the suction to suck in dust and dirt off carpets
Washing machines: to rotate the drum to wash (or dry) clothes
Refrigerators: to compress the refrigerant chemical into a liquid to reduce the
temperatureYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 43

Energy is transferred electrically from the mains supply to the kinetic store of the motor
in the appliance
Lots of household appliances contain heaters
Toasters: to heat up food
Kettles: to boil water
Boiler in a central heating system: hot water is pumped from the boiler so the
radiator can heat up a room 
Energy is transferred electrically from the mains supply to the thermal store of the
heater.
Energy transfers in common household appliances
Energy is transferred electrically from the mains supply to the kinetic store of the motor in
a washing machine, or to the thermal store of the heating element in a toaster
Electrical energy equation
The amount of energy transferred by an electrical appliance depends on:
how long the appliance runs for
the power rating of the appliance
Electrical energy can be calculated using the following equation:
E =VItYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 44

Where:
E= energy, measured in joules (J)
V = potential difference, measured in volts (V)
I = current, measured in amps (A)
t = time, measured in seconds (s)
Worked Example
A washing machine runs a cycle for 3 hours and 16 minutes. The potential difference of
the mains supply is 230 V. A current of 10.0 A flows through the washing machine for
the duration of the cycle. 
Determine the amount of energy transferred from the mains supply during the cycle.
Give your answer in MJ.
Answer:
Step 1: List the known quantities
Potential difference, V =230V
Current, I =10 .0A
Time, t =3hrs16min
Step 2: Convert the time to seconds
1 hour = 60 mins
3 ×60 =180min
180 +16 =196min
1 min = 60 s
196 ×60 =11760s
Step 3: Write out the equation for electrical energy
E =VIt
Step 4: Substitute in the known values to calculate
E =230 ×10 ×11760
E =27048000J
Step 5: Give your answer in MJ
1 MJ = 1 000 000 J
E =27MJYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 45

Electrical Power
Electrical power equation
The power of an appliance is defined as: 
The rate at which energy is transferred by an appliance
Power can be calculated in terms of energy:
P =E
t
Where:
P = power, measured in watts (W)
E = energy transferred, measured in joules (J)
t = time, measured in seconds (s)
Power can also be calculated in terms of work done:
P =W
t
Where:
W  = work done, which is equivalent to energy transferred, measured in joules (J)
The power of an electrical device is the energy transferred per second by the device
The watt (W) is equivalent to joules per second (J/s)
The power dissipated by an electrical component can be calculated by:
P =IV
Where:
P = dissipated power, measured in watts (W)
I = current, measured in amps (A)
V = potential difference, measured in volts (V)
Worked Example
Two lamps are connected in series to a 150 V power supply.Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 46

Which statement most accurately describes what happens?
A.     Both lamps light normally
B.     The 15 V lamp blows
C.     Only the 41 W lamp lights
D.     Both lamps light at less than their normal brightness
Answer: A
Step 1: State the equation for electrical power and rearrange for current
P =IV
I =P
V
Step 2: Calculate the current required for both lamps to operate
For the 41 W lamp, with a voltmeter reading of 135 V:
I =41
135=0 .3A
For the 4.5 W lamp, with a voltmeter reading of 15 V
I =4 .5
15=0 .3A
Step 3: Determine the outcome of the bulbs
For both bulbs to operate at their normal brightness, a current of 0.3 A is required
The lamps are connected in series, so the same current would flow through both
Therefore, the lamps will light at their normal brightness
This is option A
Examiner Tips and TricksYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 47

Measuring energy usage
Energy measured in joules
Electrical energy transferred is often calculated in units of joules
1 joule (J) is equivalent to 1 watt second (W s)
Consider an average lightbulb with a power of 60 W, which is left on for 6 hours in a
house
1 hour is 3600 s
The energy transferred over this time is 1.296 × 10 J
This number is large, and that is only one lightbulb for a single day
A household uses many appliances all year round; the energy transferred per month
in joules would be inconveniently large
Energy measured in kilowatt-hours
To make these large values more relatable to daily use:
Power can be measured in kilowatts (kW)
Time can be measured in hours (h)
In this case, energy has units of kilowatt-hours (kW h)
The lightbulb from before receives 0.36 kW h of energy over the 6 hours
This value is much easier to understand for consumers and energy providers; thinking in
terms of hours of use is more practical than seconds
Calculations with kWh
As has been stated previously, the equation for energy transferred is:
E =Pt
But here, different units are considered:
E = energy transferred, measured in kilowatt hours (kW h)
P = power of the appliance, measured in kilowatts (kW)
t = time, measured in hours (h)
The usual unit of energy is joules (J), which is one watt-second
To find the number of joules in 1 kW h, convert the power and time to watts and secondsWhen doing calculations involving electrical power, remember the unit is Watts W,
therefore, you should always make sure that the time is in seconds
6Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 48

1kWh =1000 W ×3600 s =3 .6 ×106J
1000 watts multiplied by 3600 seconds is equal to 1000 multiplied by 3600, in watt-
seconds
1000 W ×3600 s =1000 ×3600 Ws =3 .6 ×106J
Therefore, 1 kWh = 3.6 × 10 J
To convert from kW h to J:
E ( ) kWh × (3 .6 ×106 ) =E ( )J
To convert from J to kW h:
E ( )J÷ (3.6×106 )=E ( ) kWh
The kW h is a large unit of energy, and is mostly used for energy in homes, businesses and
factories6
Worked Example
A cooker transfers 1.2 × 10 J of energy electrically to the thermal store of the heating
element during its use over a year.
Assume that 1 kW h costs 14.2 p. 
100 p = £1 (100 pence = 1 pound)
Calculate the cost of using the oven for the year.
Answer: 
Step 1: List the known quantities
Energy in joules, E ( )J =1 .2 ×109J
Cost per kW h, 1kWh =14 .2p
Step 2: Convert the energy used from J to kW h
E ( ) kWh =1 .2 ×109
3 .6 ×106=333 .3kWh
Step 3: Calculate the price
1kWh =14 .2p
333 .3 ×14 .2 =4733 p =£47 .339
Examiner Tips and TricksYour notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 49

The kilowatt hour is a tricky concept to get your head around, so make sure you are
comfortable with the conversions between kW h and J well before your exam.
Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 50

